adding eclipse-bluechi (#18)
eclipse-sdv-blueprints/software-orchestration: eclipse-bluechi/README.md

# Eclipse BlueChi

> ![Smart trailer blueprint](../docs/diagrams/bluechi.png)

Reviewer: Depending on in which order this PR and #19 get merged, this path may need to be updated

Reviewer 2: @ladatz @odra do you have a preference of the order in which I should then merge #18 and #19? Considering the comment by @ladatz, I guess that this link needs to adapted anyway, once #19 gets merged.

Author: You can merge #19, I will rebase my pr.

> This document describe how to run the Eclipe SDV Orchestrator blueprint using Eclipse BlueChi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to run the Eclipse Software Orchestration blueprint using Eclipse BlueChi.
```

Check [this document](./what-is-bluechi.md) out in case you need a quick introduction to the project.

## Prerequisites

* A container runtime such as [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) or [Podman](https://podman.io/docs/installation)
  * [Devcontainers](./https://containers.dev/) can also be used on top of such runtimes

**_NOTE:_** non linux machines need to run docker/podman machine or similar technology.

## Development Environment

This section describes how to run this blueprint using Eclipse Bluechi.

### Devcontainers + VSCode

This section describes how to run the blueprint using the VSCode devcontainer extension.

#### Prerequisites

> * Ensure that the [Remote Development extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack) installed in VSCode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ensure that the [Remote Development extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack) is installed in VSCode
```

* Upstream documentation:
  * <https://containers.dev/>
  * https://github.com/devcontainers/cli

#### Instructions

1. You can use the VSCode devcontainer extension to start your containerized development environment.
    ```shell
    cd <absolute/path/to>/software-orchestration/eclipse-bluechi
    code .
    ```

1. VSCode detects automatically that a `.devcontainer` folder exists inside this subfolder. Please confirm the dialog to reopen VSCode inside the devcontainer. Afterwards, open a new terminal inside the devcontainer in VSCode.

### Devcontainers CLI

#### Prerequisites

Ensure you have the `devcontainer` cli installed: https://github.com/devcontainers/cli?tab=readme-ov-file#try-it-out

#### Instructions

Run the following from `<absolute/path/to>/software-orchestration/eclipse-bluechi`:

```sh
devcontainer up \
--workspace-dir .
```

You will need to specify the `--docker-path` option if you are using Podman:

```sh
devcontainer up \
--workspace-dir . \
--docker-patch /usr/bin/podman
```

You can now enter into the devcontainer and iteract with Eclipse BlueChi:

```sh
docker exec -it $container_id_or_name /bin/bash
bluechictl list-units
```

### Docker/Podman

> You can also directly run this blueprint directly with Docker or Podman.

Reviewer 2: maybe consider removing one of the two "directly"

systemd and BlueChi.

### Deploying Applications

BlueChi relies on three components to handle containerized applications:

* systemd
* Quadlet
* Podman

Application definitions are stored in `/etc/containers/systemd`. An application
needs two essential files:

* `{SERVICE_NAME}.kube`: Used by systemd to point to a Kubernetes resource definition
  containing the workload definition.

  Example of `freyja.kube`:
    ```kube
    # https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-systemd.unit.5.html
    [Kube]
    Yaml=freyja.yml

    # Commented to disable the service to automatically start
    # [Install]
    # WantedBy=default.target
    ```
* `{SERVICE_NAME}.yaml`: A Kubernetes resource definition (either `v1.Pod` or
  `apps/v1.Deployment`) that describes the workload.

  Example of `freyja.yml`:
    ```yaml
    ---
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: freyja
      name: freyja
    spec:
      replicas: 1
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          app: freyja
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app: freyja
        spec:
          hostNetwork: true
          containers:
            - name: local

>               image: sdvblueprint.azurecr.io/sdvblueprint/eclipse-freyja/local-with-ibeji:0.1.0

Reviewer: Consider updating this to the updated path for this image, since the one listed here is private.

Reviewer 2: for reference, the workflow is part of #17

`/run/systemd/generator`.

### Service Lifecycle

Services can be managed by using `systemctl`, systemd's administrative CLI.

Starting, stopping, restarting services is as easy as:

* `systemctl stop {SERVICE_NAME}`
* `systemctl start {SERVICE_NAME}`
* `systemctl restart {SERVICE_NAME}`

> Make sure to run `systemctl daemon-reload` in case something changed in either Quadlet or systemd unit files.

### Monitoring and Logs

BlueChi's CLI (`bluechictl`), can be used to retrieve information from
managed nodes:
<https://github.com/eclipse-bluechi/bluechi/blob/main/doc/man/bluechictl.1.md>.

#### Using Systemctl

Simply run `systemctl status {SERVICE_NAME}` where `{SERVICE_NAME}` is the name of your .kube file.

#### Using journalctl

This is valid for any systemd defined service, simply run `journalctl -xeu {SERVICE_NAME}`

#### Podman

You can also list all active containers by running `podman ps` and then `podman logs {CONTAINER_NAME_OR_ID}` to
get logs from the container using podman. Replace `{CONTAINER_NAME_OR_ID}` with the container's name or ID.

## Running the Smart Trailer Example with BlueChi's devcontainer
Inside of the [devcontainer](#two-development-environments):

> 1. Follow the instructions in [Starting All the Services](#starting-all-the-services) to start up the in-vehicle stack.

Reviewer: It doesn't look like these two links lead to anywhere
"#two-development-environments" and "#starting-all-the-services"

Author: ah, just left overs from the previous doc. Let me remove them.

> 1. Run the script `start_trailer_applications_bluechi.sh` to monitor for the trailer to be connected. It can be found at `in-vehicle-stack/scenarios/smart_trailer_use_case/scripts/start_trailer_applications_bluechi.sh`.

Reviewer: All of the smart trailer application files will be contributed soon in another PR. This documentation may need to change based on the new paths

Author: whoops, I missed it. I was going to remove this part as well.
